.Dd May 31 2026
.Dt CUM 9
.Os SP1
.Sh NAME
.Nm cum - component unified-access manager
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In os/cum.h

.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Component Unified-access Manager (CUM) is responsible for providing a hierarchal namespace made up of categorized opaque
objects used to represent devices, filesystems and kernel objects. It is comparable to a VFS in pure unix-like systems but more
comparable to an object manager in systems such as NT.

A CUM descriptor is a linked-list data structure used to contain CUM objects of a specific category, each CUM object is to have standardized
metadata along with an opaque data reference that points to internal subsystem specific data. All devices, kernel interfaces and components of the
like are to fit in a specific category which is referred as a
.Ft domain
.

Each domain is to have its own subsystem, referred to as a
.Ft Domain Manager (DM)
.

Upon a successful lookup of a CUM object through its path, one may interface with the resolved object by passing it to routines exposed
by a respective DM of a specific domain.

The idea behind CUM is that rather than everything being a file, everything is instead a state machine. Below is a concept program for user-space access:

.nf
.ft C
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
some_state_t *t;
int cd;

t = malloc(sizeof(*t));
...
cd = sopen("dev.ether0", ...);
...
sbind(cd, t);   // Bind to cum object
t->something = 3;
spoke(t);       // Notify kernel, flush u2k

// Can read data on the fly without system call overhead for update requests.
// Explicit notifications are only needed for write flushing.

sunbind(t);     // Unbind object
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
.ft R
.fi

To avoid data races, global mutable state within each FSM is to be split into a K2U side (Kernel-to-User) as well as a U2K (User-To-Kernel) side. Due to
the potential for high-frequency data alteration, it is recommended that FSMs are aligned to the cache-line coherency unit to avoid false sharing that may
choke up the bus.

.nf
.ft C

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
struct foo_u2k {
    uint16_t u_bufsz;
    uint8_t u_foo;
};

struct foo_k2u {
    uint16_t k_bufsz;
    uint8_t k_foo;
};

struct foo_state {
    int bind_cd;  // component descriptor
    __cacheline_aligned struct foo_u2k u2k;
    __cacheline_aligned struct foo_k2u k2u;
    ...
};
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
.ft R
.fi
